Variant effect quantification benchmarkTo directly assess the capacity of DNA foundation models to represent genetic variants within their zero-shot embeddings, we developed a unified robust quantitative framework. Our general methodology, inspired by the Enformer23 study, was to first compute a unified effect vector for each variant by subtracting the zero-shot embedding of the reference sequence from that of the alternative sequence (embedding(alt) - embedding(ref)). This standardized approach was applied across all models in our comparison, including the general DNA foundation models (DNABERT-2, NT-v2, GROVER, HyenaDNA, Caduceus-Ph), as well as Sei24, Enformer23, and, AlphaGenome22. We then trained a random forest classifier on these high-dimensional effect vectors to distinguish between the variant labels (e.g., pathogenic vs. common).To prevent data leakage from effects such as linkage disequilibrium, we employed a strict chromosome-based holdout strategy for evaluation. However, recognizing that a single arbitrary chromosome split could lead to high variance in performance estimates, especially for smaller datasets like ipaQTL and paQTL, we implemented a nested cross-validation scheme to ensure a more robust and stable evaluation. We established three distinct test sets comprised of non-overlapping chromosome groups: Group 1 (chromosomes 3, 6, 9, 12, 16, 18, 19, 21), Group 2 (chromosomes 2, 5, 11, 14, 17, 20, 22, and X), and Group 3 (chromosomes 1, 4, 7, 8, 10, 13, 15). For each of these three main folds, the corresponding group served as the test set. The remaining chromosomes served as a training-validation set, on which we performed a 4-fold inner cross-validation, also partitioned by chromosome, to tune the random forest hyperparameters. Once the optimal parameters were selected, the classifier was retrained on the entire training-validation set and evaluated on the held-out test chromosomes. The final reported test AUC and Cohen’s d scores are the average of the performances across these three independent test sets.For the short sequence (6000 bp) datasets, we compared DNABERT-2, NT-v2, GROVER, Caduceus-Ph, HyenaDNA, and Sei. Due to model-specific constraints, GROVER received the central 2048 nucleotides and Sei received the central 4096 nucleotides. For Sei, we evaluated two distinct representations: (1) its direct output across 21,907 predictive tracks, and (2) its final hidden state (dimension 15,360) after the spline transformation layer. For the long sequence (196,608 bp) datasets, we compared Caduceus-Ph, HyenaDNA (450 K checkpoint), and Enformer, with Caduceus-Ph using the central 131,072 nucleotides. For Enformer, we assessed both its final hidden state and its 5313 human-specific output tracks. For the long-sequence QTL datasets, we also included AlphaGenome, providing it the central 131,072 nucleotides of the input and averaging its output tracks over the central 2048 bp to derive the effect vector.For all experiments, no dimensionality reduction was performed on the effect vectors. However, to ensure stable and robust training for models generating relatively high dimensional embeddings (e.g., the hidden states of Sei and Enformer), we adjusted the hyperparameter search space for the random forest. Specifically, we removed the “sqrt” option from the max features tuning grid (Supplementary Table 7), thereby prioritizing the more restrictive “logarithm” option. This standard practice for high-dimensional data helps decorrelate the trees, which stabilizes the training process, reduces the risk of overfitting, and ensures a more reliable performance estimate.
