TAD region recognitionA key question for foundation models is whether their internal representations, such as self-attention patterns, learn biologically meaningful, higher-order genomic structures without explicit training. To investigate this, we assessed NT-v2’s capability to recognize topologically associating domains (TADs) by analyzing attention patterns in the self-attention mechanism. Unfortunately, such analysis is currently constrained by model architecture; other foundation models evaluated in our study either lack accessible attention mechanisms (HyenaDNA and Caduceus-Ph), accessible attention matrices (DNABERT-2), or have input length limitations that preclude meaningful analysis of large genomic structures like TADs. We processed 1500 TAD-centered sequences and 1500 randomly selected background sequences through NT-v2, extracting and averaging attention matrices across all layers and attention heads. The attention weight at any coordinate (x, y) indicates how strongly the query token at position y attends to the key token at position x during self-attention computation. Therefore, if NT-v2 can recognize TAD structures inherently, we would expect the attention weights to increase in the central region (approximately token positions 300–700), resulting in a vertical band of positive values in the average attention matrix when key tokens fall within the TAD region. But for random background sequences, the average attention matrix would not show any clear pattern. Hence the differences between these two attention matrices will also show a vertical band.Supplementary Fig. 2 displays the heatmap of the difference between attention matrices for TAD-centered versus background sequences. We observed no distinct patterns in the attention difference matrix. The heatmap shows predominantly uniform values near zero, with only minimal variation along the diagonal where tokens attend to themselves. This suggests that NT-v2’s self-attention mechanism does not recognize TAD boundaries without specific fine-tuning.Our analysis represents the current extent of attention mechanism interpretability for DNA foundation models associated with chromatin structures, and reveals current DNA foundation models’ limitations on interpretability. This finding highlights a critical challenge and a vital area for future research, and extending such interpretability analyses is crucial for moving these models from “black box” predictors to tools that can generate essential biological insights.
