Benchmarking datasetsSequence classification datasetsTo unbiasedly evaluate the foundation models, we collected and curated datasets from five distinct sequence classification sources. These datasets were selected to reflect a wide range of potential downstream tasks, ensuring they are both challenging and achievable. While these datasets are not genome-wide in terms of exhaustive coverage, they have been carefully curated by focusing on sub-sampled genomic regions that capture local regulatory signals within controlled windows, each with specific sampling strategies to reduce noise and redundancy.DNase-I hypersensitive sites detection27: The datasets used in the study consist of positive DNA sequences for the 280 Dnase I hypersensitive sites (DHS), and negative sequences for the 737 non-Dnase I hypersensitive sites, originally collected by ref. 28 and has been widely used for benchmarking the detection of DNase I hypersensitive sites29,30. The positive sequences are experimentally identified DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs), which are markers for open chromatin and active regulatory elements. The 737 negative sequences are genomic regions verified as non-DHS. Identification of the DNA sequences containing DHS is crucial for detecting DNA regulatory regions, as DHS is indicative of genomic regulatory regions. The datasets consist of a curated set of human genomic regions representing a specific challenge set designed for direct comparison against prior computational methods. sequence length ranges from 225−275 base pairs.5mC and 6 mA modifications detection in human31: We use the two benchmark datasets to predict 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and N6-methyladenosine (6 mA) modifications in human (Homo sapiens) DNA in this study. The datasets were originally collected by ref. 32 which have been subsequently adopted by relevant tasks33. These datasets consist of short, 41 bp sequences centered on specific cytosine or adenine sites in the human genome. Both the positive (methylated) and negative (non-methylated) samples are derived from experimental profiling studies. Sequences with high similarity were computationally filtered out to reduce redundancy and potential bias.Promoter identification in multiple species34: We use 8 datasets from a study that established a benchmark for identifying promoters across multiple species, covering 4 distinct organisms including human (4 different cell lines of GM12878, NHEK, HeLa-S3, HUVEC), B. amyloliquefaciens, R. capsulatus, and Arabidopsis (TATA and non-TATA). These datasets focus on genomic regions proximal to transcription start sites (TSS). The positive samples are promoter sequences derived from experimentally-based ENCODE annotations for human cell lines, as well as established promoter sequences for bacterial and plant species. The negative samples for this task were computationally generated by identifying non-promoter genomic regions that have the highest sequence similarity to the corresponding positive promoter sequences, creating a challenging classification problem. Sequence lengths vary significantly, from under 100 bp in bacteria to over 2000 bp in human cell lines.N4-methylcytosine (4 mC) site detection in multiple species35: For this task, we utilized six distinct datasets that the authors collected to benchmark, corresponding to E. coli, C. elegans, G. pickeringii, G. subterraneus, D. melanogaster, and A. thaliana, consist of 41 bp sequences centered on potential 4 mC sites. The positive samples are experimentally identified 4 mC sites collected from public databases. The negative samples (non-4 mC sites) were generated by randomly sampling sequences from the respective genomes. It is important to note that while 4mC is a well-established modification in prokaryotes like E. coli and the Geobacter species, for eukaryotic species (A. thaliana, C. elegans, D. melanogaster), 4mC site annotations are often reliant on computational predictions rather than direct, genome-wide high-stringency chemical mapping due to ongoing research into its prevalence and detection []. This distinction is important for the interpretation of model performance on predicting sequences containing 4 mC sites.Genomic Benchmarks dataset collection36: We also downloaded a suite of datasets from the Genomic Benchmarks collection, which provides benchmarks for classifying key regulatory elements. The tasks from this collection include identifying promoters, enhancers, and open chromatin regions in humans, as well as distinguishing between coding and intergenic DNA and differentiating sequences between species (human and C. elegans). For these datasets, positive samples are derived from experimentally-validated sources like the FANTOM5 project and the Ensembl Regulatory Build. The negative samples consist of randomly sampled, length-matched sequences from non-overlapping genomic regions, and sequence lengths typically range from 200 to over 2000 base pairs.We also adopted a large collection of datasets from the downstream task benchmarks in DNABERT-2 and NT-v2. These datasets cover a diverse range of tasks including promoter (proximal and core), transcription factor binding site, splice site, and epigenetic mark prediction across species like human, mouse, and yeast. The majority of these tasks are region-specific, focusing on sequences of a few hundred base pairs centered on the functional element. A common paradigm in their construction is the use of experimentally-derived positive samples (e.g., from ENCODE ChIP-seq), while negative samples are sometimes generated through methods like dinucleotide shuffling, random sampling with matched GC-content, or even adversarial example generation to increase task difficulty. Since these datasets were originally pre-processed into specific splits, we re-shuffled them to ensure a fair and rigorous comparison in our framework.With all the datasets we collected, there are in total 57 datasets included in this study, including 52 binary classification datasets and 5 multi-class datasets. A key characteristic of these 57 classification tasks is their focus on short sequences (41 to ~2000 bp), a design intended to test local signal recognition. Detailed descriptions and our naming of all 57 datasets can be found in Supplementary Note 1. In Supplementary Note 2, we also annotated each dataset on whether the sequences are relied on experimentally validated or golden standard sources. The specific training size, testing size, class label distribution, and details of sequence lengths for all datasets used in our study can be found in Supplementary Data 6.To facilitate a systematic analysis, we categorized these 57 datasets into four distinct categories based on the nature of their respective classification tasks: (1) Human Genome Sequence Region Classification: This category encompasses tasks such as identification of transcription factor binding sites, promoter regions, and other functional elements within the human genome. (2) Multi-Species Genome Sequence Region Classification: These tasks involve distinguishing genomic regions across different species, for example, differentiating between human and Caenorhabditis elegans (worm) genome sequences. (3) Human Genome Epigenetic Trait Classification: This group includes tasks related to identifying epigenetic modifications specific to the human genome, such as detection of N4-methylcytosine (4mC) sites. (4) Multi-Species Genome Epigenetic Trait Classification: These tasks focus on identifying and classifying epigenetic traits across multiple species’ genomes. We present and analyze our findings separately for each of these four dataset categories, allowing for a comprehensive assessment of the models’ capabilities and limitations in various genomic classification scenarios. It is important to note that the input sequences for all 57 classification datasets, which range from 41 bp to ~2000 bp, fall well within the maximum input length of all foundation models evaluated in these tasks. Therefore, a direct comparison was possible without sequence truncation, ensuring that each model was evaluated on identical, biologically relevant inputs for these tasks.Gene expression prediction datasetsTo evaluate DNA foundation models in predicting gene expression, we used the GTEx v8 dataset37, which provides gene expression measurements across multiple human tissues. We focused on whole blood (610 subjects, 21,004 genes) tissue. We generated subject-specific DNA sequences by incorporating individual genetic variants from whole-genome sequencing VCF data into the human reference genome (GRCh38/hg38). For each gene, we extracted sequences spanning 3000 base pairs upstream and downstream of the transcription start site (TSS), resulting in ~6000-nucleotide sequences that include subject-specific SNPs and insertion/deletion variants. The variants have been phased so both alleles are generated. Consequently, for each gene we have generated {subject-specific sequences on both alleles, subject gene expression} pairs.To consider models which are capable of processing longer sequences, we created an extended-context dataset with sequences spanning TSS ± 98 K base pairs. We included sequences of such length for two key reasons: (1) Some versions of HyenaDNA and Caduceus can process sequences significantly longer than 6000 bps, and we wanted to assess whether they generate improved zero-shot embeddings with extended genomic context; and (2) Enformer23, another transformer model that has demonstrated success in predicting gene expression, accepts sequences up to 196,608 bps long, allowing us to benchmark it against DNA foundation models.For each gene, we regressed the gene expression on covariates provided by GTEx v8, including demographic variables such as sex, probabilistic estimation of expression residuals (PEER) factors, and top genotype principal components used to account for population structure37. The residuals from this regression, representing covariate-corrected gene expression levels, served as the quantitative trait for our prediction models to learn from the sequence data. The 6000 bps dataset includes all genes. For the long sequence dataset, due to computational constraints, we randomly selected 1000 genes and excluded genes not present in whole blood tissue dataset or genes whose TSS ± 98 K exceed chromosome boundaries, making the final total of 768 genes.Variant effect quantification datasetsTo directly assess the capacity of DNA foundation models to represent genetic variants within their zero-shot embeddings, we developed two distinct benchmarks: one focused on differentiating pathogenic from common variants, and another on identifying functional quantitative trait loci (QTLs).Our first benchmark utilizes data from the Genomics Long-Range Benchmark38, which provides two distinct categories: pathogenic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with disease phenotypes and common SNPs frequently observed in the population. Following the methodology of generating paired sequences, we constructed a reference sequence and a corresponding alternative sequence for each SNP by replacing the central nucleotide. This process resulted in a dataset of {reference sequence, alternative sequence} pairs, where each pair corresponds to a single SNP and is labeled as either pathogenic or common. To accommodate models with different input length capabilities, we created two versions of the dataset. For models supporting longer contexts, we extracted 196,608 bp sequences, resulting in 22,222 pathogenic and 17,374 common sequences. For models with shorter input limits, we used 6000 bp sequences, yielding 22,239 pathogenic and 17,398 common sequences. In both cases, a small number of SNPs were omitted where the required sequence length exceeded chromosome boundaries. The purpose of this benchmark is to evaluate if the change between the reference and alternate allele embeddings is distinct enough to distinguish pathogenic from benign genetic variation.As a second benchmark, we adopted the curated putative causal QTL dataset from the Borzoi39 study. The dataset contains high-confidence causal variants, was originally derived from GTEx v8 and has been statistically fine-mapped. We focus on QTLs from the whole blood tissue. In total, there are 1896 expression QTLs (eQTLs), 540 splicing QTLs (sQTLs), 116 intronic-polyadenylation QTLs (ipaQTLs), and 142 polyadenylation QTLs (paQTLs). A key strength of this dataset is its rigorously constructed negative set, where each putative causal QTL is paired with a carefully matched non-causal variant based on characteristics such as distance to the relevant functional site and the expression level of the associated gene. For each variant, this resulted in a {reference sequence, alternative sequence} pair, labeled according to its specific QTL classification (e.g., eQTL, sQTL) or as a non-causal variant. Similar to the pathogenic versus common SNP benchmark, we constructed sequence datasets of both long (196,608 bp) and short (6000 bp) sequences, again filtering out a small number of SNPs due to chromosome length limits.TAD region datasetTo evaluate DNA foundation models’ ability to recognize topologically associating domains (TADs), we utilized the processed dataset of TAD boundaries measured in IMR90 cells following the Enformer study23. The dataset contains TAD regions of 2400 base pairs across the human genome, each with an estimated boundary strength score reflecting the magnitude of interaction changes at the boundary. We filtered the dataset to include only TAD regions with boundary strength in the top 5%, and then selected 1500 TAD regions with the strongest boundaries, similar to the workflow in Enformer study. For each selected TAD region, we extracted 6000 bp sequences from the human reference genome, positioning the 2400 bp TAD region in the center with flanking context on both sides. This generated a total of 1500 TAD-centered sequences. As a control, we randomly sampled 1500 background sequences of identical length (6000 bp) from the reference genome, representing genomic regions without known TAD boundaries. This balanced design allowed for direct comparison between TAD-centered sequences and background sequences.The objective of this dataset was to compare the attention matrices generated by foundation models when processing TAD-centered sequences versus background sequences. Since NT-v2 is the only model in our evaluation that both returns attention matrices and supports sufficiently long input sequences, we focused exclusively on NT-v2 for this task.
